now most of us have been there you wake
up in the middle of the night you've had
this tremendous jolt like an electric
shock go through your leg
it's cramp and if this happens
frequently then that can really mess
with your sleep over a third of us get
cramp and it becomes more common as we
get older but what exactly is it well I
could demonstrate using this rather
sinister kid right mmm and that it just
send it all the way down there and I can
feel my toes really cramping oh yeah
that is very unpleasant the electrodes
on my neck are sending an electrical
signal to my muscles and that makes them
contract tightly in a way I simply can't
control it's thought that this is what
happens when you get cramp only it's
nerves in your muscles themselves that
causes uncontrollable tightening so why
does that happen
and how can we stop it
there are lots of different theories
about what causes crap it could simply
be exhausted in the muscles or something
to do with salt perhaps too much salt
more likely too little if you do lots of
heavy exercise then you're going to
sweat new salt and become dehydrated but
recent research has shown the theory
that assault imbalance can lead to cramp
is just a myth
so drinking water or taking salts is not
likely to help the leading theory now is
that cramp tends to occur when our
muscles have been overworking the
constant tensing and relaxing that
happens even when we do everyday
activities like walking around so cramp
can happen to any one of us the best way
to relieve it is by stretching now if
your problem is cramping in the calf
muscle sims lean against the wall put
your foot up and just stretch a little
bit and you should really feel it yeah
down in the calf stretching over comes
the signals from your nerves and
reverses the contraction of the muscle
allowing both to settle down and get
back to normal but how to prevent cramps
from starting especially at night well
you could try this get a spare pillow
put it down here put your foot on top of
it like that and that's what supports it
but it also creates a little bit of
stretch in the calf the theory is that
sleeping in a position that gently
stretches your muscles might prevent an
attack of cramp
and lying on your front hanging your
feet over the end of the bed might do
the same thing road-test these and it
may just give you a better night's sleep
good night
you